feat: release notes and migration guide for track 2 (#100)
canonical/observability-stack: docs/reference/release-notes.md

# COS 2 release notes
October 2025

These release notes cover new features and changes in COS 2.

COS 2 is designated as a short-term support release. This means it will continue to receive security updates and critical bug fixes for 9 months.

See our [release policy](release-policy.md) and [upgrade instructions](../how-to/upgrade.md).

## Requirements and compatibility

> See [system requirements](system-requirements.md).

Reviewer: If these are general requirements that shouldn't be changing on a per-release basis, then you can keep it as is with the template.

If these change depending on the release, I think it's fine to deviate from the template and put that information directly in the release notes.

You can decide what's best for your product - just wanted to add that perspective since this is a newer process for your team :)

Reviewer 2: Thanks!
Generally sysreqs shouldn't change from release to release, but even if they do, we'd have it covered anyway because the docs are versioned. Unless I'm missing something?

Reviewer: Ahh, right. Yea that's fine then, I forgot your docs are versioned anyway

COS 2 is compatible with Juju v3.6+.

## What's new in COS 2

> - Terraform modules for COS and COS Lite.

Reviewer: Can you link where they get these modules? Are they templates? 

I'm not that familiar with Terraform, so if there's no where sensical to link, then leave it as is.

But also - this item feels like a much bigger change than the other items in the list. Is this one more notable? If yes, can you add more information about it?

Reviewer 2: Done.

> - Grafana v12. We upgraded the workload version from Grafana 9 to Grafana 12. A thorough review of Grafana's breaking changes and how they affect us is available [on Discourse](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/cos-will-start-using-grafana-12-what-changed/18868).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Grafana v12**: We upgraded the workload version from Grafana 9 to Grafana 12. A thorough review of Grafana's breaking changes and how they affect us is available [on Discourse](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/cos-will-start-using-grafana-12-what-changed/18868).
```

This item and the ones below would be easier to scan with this style of formatting

> - `extra_alert_labels` config option. A new config option in grafana-agent and opentelemetry-collector enabled adding custom labels to alert rules. This is useful for differentiating alerts from site with different SLAs.

Reviewer: "This is useful for differentiating alerts from site with different SLAs." - is this supposed to be from "sites" (plural)?  It reads a bit off to me, but I'm not sure if that was the issue.

"This" in "This is useful" is a bit ambiguous - it can be interpreted as saying the config option is useful for XYZ or that the labels themselves are useful for XYZ. It's sort of the same thing when you think about it, but then the user has to stop and think about it :shrug: Changing it to "This option is useful..." or "Custom labels are useful..." (or similar) is a little easier to read

Reviewer 2: Done.

> - API links in catalogue-k8s. The cards in catalogue-k8s now support extra links, for docs and API. COS charms now provide link to the workload API, making it easier to locate ingress URLs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **API links in catalogue-k8s**: The cards in catalogue-k8s now support extra links for documentation and APIs. COS charms now provide links to the workload API, making it easier to locate ingress URLs
```

for workloads without a web UI.
- Opentelemetry collector. Opentelemetry-collector was released and is to replace the deprecated grafana-agent (goes EOL in November 2025).

> - Multiple scripts in script-exporter. The script exporter VM charm can now take an archive of scripts. It can now be deployed on 20.04, 22.04 and 24.04.

Reviewer 2: Moved under a new section.

## Backwards-incompatible changes
- Charms from track 2 can be deployed on juju models v3.6+.
- Terraform module variable `model_name` renamed to `model` in all charms.

> - Changes in Grafana v12 to how the panel view URL is generated for repeated panels. Links to **repeated panels** in a dashboard changed slightly; previously bookmarked links specifically to a repeated panel (not its dashboard) won't work anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Grafana v12 changes how the panel view URL is generated for repeated panels. Links to **repeated panels** in a dashboard changed slightly; previously bookmarked links to a repeated panel (not its dashboard) will no longer work.
```
To put the actual topic upfront. Couple other minor wording suggestions

## Deprecated features

> - The `LogProxyConsumer` charm library (owned by Loki) is deprecated in favor of pebble log forwarding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `LogProxyConsumer` charm library (owned by Loki) is deprecated. Use Pebble log forwarding instead.
```
I think it's a bit clearer having them split like this

Reviewer 2: Done.

> # COS 2 release notes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# COS (`track/2`) release notes
```

October 2025

> These release notes cover new features and changes in COS 2.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These release notes cover new features and changes in COS on `track/2`.
```

COS 2 is designated as a short-term support release. This means it will continue to receive security updates and critical bug fixes for 9 months.

See our [release policy](release-policy.md) and [upgrade instructions](../how-to/upgrade.md).

## Requirements and compatibility
See [system requirements](system-requirements.md).

> COS 2 is compatible with Juju v3.6+. When deployed using terraform, Juju v3.6.11+ is recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
COS (`track/2`) is compatible with Juju v3.6+. When deployed using terraform, Juju v3.6.11+ is recommended.
```
